Thonny
Python IDE for beginners
Main screenshot

Features
Easy to get started. Thonny comes with Python 3.7 built in, so just one simple installer is needed and you're ready to learn programming. (You can also use a separate Python installation, if necessary.) The initial user interface is stripped of all features that may distract beginners.

Initial layout
No-hassle variables. Once you're done with hello-worlds, select View → Variables and see how your programs and shell commands affect Python variables.

Variables table
Simple debugger. Just press Ctrl+F5 instead of F5 and you can run your programs step-by-step, no breakpoints needed. Press F6 for a big step and F7 for a small step. Steps follow program structure, not just code lines.

Stepping through statements
Step through expression evaluation. If you use small steps, then you can even see how Python evaluates your expressions. You can think of this light-blue box as a piece of paper where Python replaces subexpressions with their values, piece-by-piece.

Visualization of expression evaluation
Faithful representation of function calls. Stepping into a function call opens a new window with separate local variables table and code pointer. Good understanding of how function calls work is especially important for understanding recursion.

Visualization of call frames
Highlights syntax errors. Unclosed quotes and parentheses are the most common beginners' syntax errors. Thonny's editor makes these easy to spot.

Visualization of syntax errors
Explains scopes. Highlighting variable occurrences reminds you that the same name doesn't always mean the same variable and helps spotting typos. Local variables are visually distinguished from globals.

Local and global names are visually distinguished
Mode for explaining references. Variables are initially presented according to simplified model (name → value) but you can switch to more realistic model (name → address/id → value).

Variables table vs values table
Code completion. Students can explore APIs with the help of code completion.

Code completion
Beginner friendly system shell. Select Tools → Open system shell to install extra packages or learn handling Python on command line. PATH and conflicts with other Python interpreters are taken care of by Thonny.

System shell prepared for Python commands
Simple and clean pip GUI. Select Tools → Manage packages for even easier installation of 3rd party packages.

System shell prepared for Python commands
Demo

Credits

From 2014 to 2018 the main development of Thonny took place in Institute of Computer Science of University of Tartu, Estonia.


Since September 2018 development of Thonny is partially supported by Cybernetica AS.


Development of several features in Thonny 3.0 and 3.3 was proposed and supported by Raspberry Pi Foundation.

We are also grateful for the help of several contributors from the open-source community around the world.

Instructions & downloads
Installation instructions
for Windows
for Mac
for Linux
pip install thonny
FAQ
Wiki
Latest stable releases are linked in the download box at the top of this page. Older releases and prereleases can be found at https://github.com/thonny/thonny/releases

Plug-ins
Thonny has simple infrastructure for extensions.

These are some known Thonny plug-ins:

thonny-black-format adds a command for formatting current file with Black
thonny-ev3dev allows uploading code to EV3 (and much more)
thonny-error-explainer extends Assistant with new error checkers
thonny-lahendus allows loading exercises from lahendus.ut.ee and submitting solutions for automatic assessment.
thonny-edison allows uploading Python code to Edison educational robot
thonny-dracula adds Dracula syntax theme.
thonny-onedark adds One Dark syntax theme.
thonny-crosshair adds commands for invoking CrossHair analyzer.
thonny-icontract-hypothesis adds commands for invoking icontract-hypothesis analyzer.
Note that Thonny developers are not responsible for these plug-ins!
Contact & News
Blog
Changelog
Forum / mailing list
Issues
Facebook page
Twitter page
Papers
Thonny, a Python IDE for learning programming (poster paper at ITiCSE'15)
Introducing Thonny, a Python IDE for learning programming (short paper at Koli Calling'15)